Luther Sermon on Threefold Righteousness
Sermon on Threefold Righteousness
(Philippians 2)
-
Sermon on Threefold Righteousness
From the texts in:
Band 2, (Weimar: Hermann Boehlau, 1884), pp. 41-47
and
J.G. Walch and G. Stoeckhardt eds., Band 10
(St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House, 1885), cols. 1254-1263.
Translated by The Reverend Dr. Glen Zweck
_______________
TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION
In 1519, Luther preached a sermon "On Twofold Righteousness", based on
Philippians 2:5-11. This teaching, of a twofold righteousness, was
incorporated into the
Formula of Concord
(Solid Declaration, Article
III, "Righteousness", paragraph 32; Tappert, pp. 544-545;
Triglotta
,
p. 927). In this sermon, Luther identifies first a righteousness that is
alien, and infused from outside us, namely the righteousness of Christ.
Second is our own righteousness, the work and fruit of this first
righteousness.
The abrupt way in which this sermon states its thesis suggests that it
was deliberately intended by Luther to be a correction of, and replacement
for, his Sermon on Threefold Righteousness. I suggest that this
conclusion is inescapable, if one compares literal translations of both
sermons. For this reason, the translation below has deliberately been kept
as close to the original Latin as possible. The WA editors suggest the
Sermon on Threefold Righteousness was preached in September of 1518. I
would insist that the structure of this sermon, despite a few Lutheran
nuances, expresses a pre-Reformation theology of conversion (a civic
righteousness, followed by an intrinsic righteousness, followed by an
imputed righteousness). The German translation of this sermon, in the
St. Louis edition, makes Luther more Lutheran than he was at the time.
Preached at Wittenberg in 1518
OF THE REVEREND FATHER MARTIN LUTHER, WITTENBERG AUGUSTINIAN.
Threefold is sin, to which is opposed a threefold righteousness or piety.
THE FIRST
is criminal
todsuende
, that is manifest evil, which even the secular
power punishes, such as theft, homicide, arson, sacrilege, etc. Of these it
punishes some with the sword, with fire, with water, with a gallows,
with the wheel, such as in civil law, others with canonical penance, such
as ordinary fornications, and still others , such as in canon law.
To this (sin) that apparent righteousness
Scheingerechtigkeit
is
contrary which makes [people into] the apes, peacocks and fig trees of
Solomon (1 Kgs 10:22), by which comes about, that a man is good before
people, and cannot be accused, and avoids the punishments of the law, and
receives the temporal promises of the law [Rom 10:5]. Moses wrote, with
reference to that righteousness which is of the law, that if a person does
it, he will live in it (Lev 18:5, compare Gal 3:12), and Isaiah 1:19, If you
are willing and obedient you shall eat the good of the land. Such was
Naaman the Syrian, a great man before his lord, through whom the LORD
gave salvation to Syria [ 2 Kgs 5:1]. Such were many kings of Israel and the
people of Israel to whom the LORD gave good temporal things and many
victories, notwithstanding they were idolaters at the same time; such the
Samaritans, from whom God took away the lions [2 Kgs 17:25-40],
although they were worshipping idols and the LORD at the same time. Such
were the Romans according to Blessed Augustine [In his book on The City
of God, 51.1.14] to whom the LORD gave the greatest empire. Thus he is
accustomed to enrich also princes. Such to this very day are all who are
doing penance on account of plague, hunger, war, or other scourges of God,
who then pray, make pilgrimages, and make vows to the saints. Here
belong those who worship the saints for the sake of bodily things, and
priests who serve for the sake of present [temporal] things, and likewise
the monks, and those who do many other such things. In short, this is the
righteousness which receives its reward here, and is punished in the
future, but somewhat more mildly than criminals [but hereafter receives
eternal punishment, though milder than that of coarse criminals].
In the second place, it serves not God, but itself, nor is it the
righteousness of sons but of slaves, nor is it peculiar to Christians, but
rather is that of Jews and Gentiles. Nor are Christians to be exhorted to
it, because it proceeds out of fear of punishment or love of its own
comfort, not from the love of God.
Thirdly, it makes hypocrites, proud in the mind of their own heart, bold
judges of others, as is plain in [the parable of] that Pharisee and Simon
the Leper. [Lk 18:11; 7:39].
Fourthly the Apostle pronounced this curse (Gal 3:10): those who are of the
works of the law [he says] are under a curse.
Therefore Christians, who are to be enriched with eternal good things, are
not to be exhorted to that [righteousness], but rather discouraged (from it)
in favour of a better one. Hence one is not to rejoice in these things; just
as God enriches the Princes of Saxony with glory, riches, and pleasure,
because they are religious [pious lords], And if these things were not
enough, He will bring forth still a mountain of silver and peace [in the
land] will be preserved. But let them see themselves, whether this will do
them any good [for their salvation], lest they be mercenaries. For these
rewards are the rewards of that lowliest and accursed righteousness,
which pertains to the blessing of Esau and his sons (Gen 27:39f). These are
those who boast of the free will of the
Themenites
[trust in their own
conceit, like the
Themenites
- Baruch 3:23]. Thus God rewards even evil
things, because just as they are good in the eyes of men, so also they
receive good things in the eyes of men. . .
THE SECOND
is essential sin, natal, original, alien, concerning which
Ps 51:7: Behold, for in iniquity I was conceived, and in sin my mother
conceived me, concerning which Christ: the tree cannot make good fruits
[Matt 7:18] and Rom 5:19a: through the disobedience of one man many were
constituted sinners, and through the transgression of one human all
humans into condemnation. And this is the sin which makes the prior
righteousness to be nothing and evil and cursed, as Christ says [Matt
12:33]: Either make the tree good and the fruits good, or the tree evil and
the fruits of it evil.
Secondly, that sin is incurable by the strength of man, nor does free will
have any validity here, so that even the saints say: The evil which I do not
wish, this I do [Rom 7:19] and Gal 5:17: You are not doing the things which
you wish, [Ps 38:8]. Since my loins are filled with illusions, etc.
Thirdly, that is, what we all feel in desiring, being angry, especially
when confronted by obstacles [
objectis praesentibus
], as the Lord
says concerning a defective eye [Matt 6:23], etc. Therefore I said essential,
because we contracted it through birth, and it remains always, nor does it
pass by anywhere, inasmuch as it is actual, inasmuch as a spring, potion, or
water is naturally salted with salt [
sicut fons, venenum aut aqua salis
naturaliter salsa est
], as a leprous body has naturally of such a kind and
a blind body likewise. I am not dealing here with logic.
The righteousness contrary to this is likewise natal, essential, original,
alien, which is the righteousness of Christ [John 3:5], Unless he will have
been reborn out of water and spirit. Likewise John 1:12: As many as
received him, he gave to them power to become sons of God. And 1 John
3:9: He who has been born out of God, does not keep on sinning (that is, is
not a sinner), but the generation of God preserves him [Rom 5:18-19]
through the righteousness of one human into all humans into the
justification of life, and through the obedience of one human many are
constituted righteous.
This is concerning what I have just spoken about, what sort it should be,
capital, foundation, our rock and our whole substance, in which we glory
into eternity, as the Apostle says, because our life is hidden together with
Christ in God [Col 3:3], and again: that we might be the righteousness of
God in that one [2 Cor 5:21], and in 1 Cor 1:30: other foundation no one can
lay.
Secondly, this becomes ours through faith [Rom 1:17], the righteous one
lives out of faith, and Rom 10:10, With the heart it is believed to
righteousness. This [righteousness] is conferred through baptism, this
is properly what the Gospel announces, and is not the righteousness of the
law, but the righteousness of grace.
Thirdly, he who has this [righteousness], even if he should sin, is not being
damned [Ps 89:31, 32, should they have sinned, etc. For here is the
spoiled son (as it is said), who cannot offend whatever he shall have
done. [Ps 25:10]. The universal ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.
Fourthly, through this [righteousness] a human being becomes lord of all
things, because his righteousness looks down from heaven [Psalm 85:11,
12], and here righteousness and truth meet each other, righteousness and
peace kiss, for truth springs up from the ground. For without mercy a human
being is a hypocrite, without righteousness he is restless. Grace makes
[him] truthful, righteous, and true righteousness [makes] peace: but that
truth is Christ, a human being [is] deceit.
Fifthly, the Apostle says [Rom 5:14]: that Adam is the pattern of the
future one, obviously in the same way that Adam by one sin, certainly
alien to them, by that same sin, as properly their own sin, makes all born
out of him answerable and gives them what he has, so Christ by means of
His own righteousness, that same righteousness of his own, alien to them
and unmerited, makes all those born out of him righteous and saved ones,
so that, as we were damned by means of an alien sin, thus we might be
freed by an alien righteousness.
And so I said this essential and eternal, because it remains always and
does not cease anywhere as actual, in accordance with that Ps 112:9. His
righteousness remains into the age of the age. Only Christ is eternal: thus
his righteousness also is eternal, and nevertheless ours. This is the mercy
of God the Father, this the grace of the New Testament, by means of which
the Lord is sweet to those who eat him: in this [grace] we must be saved,
and no other. Acts 15:9 Not is a name given to us under heaven, etc. Ps 31:2,
In your righteousness free me, and: God, in your name make me safe, etc.
[Ps 54:3], This is what I said: No one is saved by his own name itself, but
as a member of a class (that is not as Peter, Paul, John, but as Christian),
as it says John 3:13, no one ascends into heaven unless he descends, the
son of man, who is in heaven, concerning which I have just spoken more
fully.
THE THIRD
sin is actual, which is the fruit of original. These surely are our own
personal sins, namely all the works which we do, even righteousnesses
prior to faith, according to the Apostle Rom 2:21 and 3:10, 11. You
therefore who teach another, do you not teach yourself? and again: there is
none righteous, there is none who understands, and again: for you who judge
practise the same things, for in whatever you judge another, you condemn
yourself, and in this the evil of original sin is increased (Rom 2:1), nor
nevertheless can it be avoided by means of one's own strength.
The righteousness contrary to this is actual ["act-ive"], which flows out of
faith and essential righteousness, concerning which the Apostle says
[1 Cor 15:49]: As we have born the image of the man of dust, we shall also
bear the image of the heavenly man, and in Ps 85:13. Righteousness will
go before him (that is, there are righteous ones in work before him) and
shall make his footsteps our pathway. And concerning that we must now
speak at greater length, where I stopped before.
First, these works are said to be meritorious: I do not know whether they
understand this, I confess that I had not understood it. Faith is the whole
merit: it is a mere empty conceit, that one single fleeting action should be
worth eternal life: it is necessary that the person be worthy. Christ merited
for us and has donated, and donates it daily.
Secondly, how it can be merit, when in fact all the saints sin, according to
this: Do not enter into judgment with your servant [Ps 143:2]; and Christ
[Matt 7:11]: If you, then being evil, and, [Matt 6;12]: Forgive for us our
debts, and Blessed Augustine: woe to the life of men, however
praiseworthy it might be, if it is judged without mercy. Yet on the other
hand [2 Cor 5:10]: That each one may receive the things done in the body,
and 2 Chron 15:7: For your work shall be rewarded and Gen 15:1: I am your
shield, your exceedingly great reward , and Eccl 9:7, Go, eat your bread
with joy, and drink your wine with a merry heart; for God has already
accepted your works. Finally, let every Christian beware, lest he ever be
uncertain, whether his works please God (for he who so doubts, sins and
destroys all his works and labours in vain), but it is necessary that he
believe that he pleases God, as the Apostle says: For our boasting is this:
the testimony of our conscience that we conducted ourselves in this world
without reproach in simplicity and godly sincerity [2 Cor 1:12], and again:
[1 Cor 9:26]: Therefore I run thus: not with uncertainty. Thus I fight: not as
one who beats the air; and Peter [2 Pet 1:10] Be diligent through good
works to make your calling and election sure. For he who does not know or
doubts whether he acts well or always believes himself to be acting
badly, always sins and destroys his whole life, because he is acting not
out of faith nor in faith.
What therefore are we to do? How can we simultaneously plead
against sentence of condemnation and seek glory? It is responded: The
Cherubim enlighten us with their adverse faces; for these are contrary by
means of face [Angesicht], but come together into the place of atonement
by means of sight [Zuschauen]. Thus those authorities contrary among
themselves agree in Christ. Thus our works, if you look at them alone, are
sins, and thus sentence of judgment is to be pleaded against by you (that
is, if they should be discussed alone, without Christ), but you trust that
in Christ, those things are pleasing to God, which are not themselves alone
able to please, as the Church prays. Accordingly, whether you sin or not,
you always steadfastly lean upon Christ and that natural righteousness.
For seven times in a day the righteous one falls and rises as often [Prov
24:16], and Ps 37:24: Although the righteous one shall have fallen, he is
not hurt; for the LORD puts his own hand forth.
Thirdly, what works are chiefly to be done? I reply: Especially those which
promote chief righteousness and decrease original sin: thus to each and
every one is the appropriate examination necessary of his own thing,
because original sin expresses itself in one person so, and in another thus,
The general things are prayers, alms, fasting, finally Rom 12 most
beautifully of all things, and elsewhere: Mortify your members [Col 3:5].
Because from that third righteousness nothing else is sought, than that
original sin be overcome, and the body of sin destroyed, and thus the
reigning righteousness itself be a merit, not however because the act
have a reward, but only advances the merit.
Fourthly, before all things, guard yourself from works elected by yourself,
because these do not purge sins, but rather pollute, as are in our time
ceremonies, prayers, little speeches [
voculae
], structures of the
churches. Thus those works rather purify which God imposes and names:
hence of all the best are sufferings, adversities, penury, ignominies, death,
because here alone God works and man suffers, and most perfectly Adam is
killed, and Christ the vine is purified and his vine is dressed [John 15]. For
this is the best way to salvation, difficult to walk, but quite happily in the
end.
The sermon concerning threefold sin and threefold righteousness ends.
This text is c1997 by Glen Zweck, the translator and was converted
by him to ascii format for Project Wittenberg. You may freely
distribute for non-commercial purposes. All other rights reserved by
the translator.
Rev. Robert E. Smith of the Walther Library
at Concordia Theological Seminary.
E-mail: smithre@mail.ctsfw.edu
Surface Mail: 6600 N. Clinton St., Ft. Wayne, IN 46825 USA
Phone: (260) 452-3149     Fax: (260) 452-2126
-